Pass over first few sections (#860)
browserengineering/book: book/invalidation.md

next: skipped
...

When we [used compositing](animations.md) to make animations smoother,

> we had to skip interactions that affect layout, like text editing or

Author: Great great fix.

DOM modifications. Luckily, we can avoid redundant layout work
treating the layout tree as a kind of cache, and only recomputing the
parts that change. This *invalidation* technique is traditionally
complex and bug-prone, but we'll use a principled approach and simple
abstractions to make it managable.

Editing Content
===============

In [Chapter 13](animations.md), we used compositing to smoothly
animate CSS properties like `transform` or `opacity`. But we couldn't
animate _layout-inducing_ properties this way because they change not
only the _display list_ but also the _layout tree_. And while it's
best to avoid animating layout-inducing properties, many user
interactions need to be smooth but require changing the layout tree.

One good example is editing text. People type pretty quickly, so even
a few frames' delay is distracting. But editing changes the HTML tree
and therefore the layout tree. Rebuild the layout tree from scratch,
which our browser currently does, can drop multiple frames on complex

> pages. Try, for example, loading this chapter in our toy browser and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pages. Try, for example, loading [this chapter](invalidations.md) in our toy browser and
```

Author: Good idea

typing into this input box:

<input style="width:100%"/>

You'll find that it is *much* too slow.

Typing into `input` elements could be special-cased,[^no-resize] but
there are other text editing APIs that can't be. For example, the
`contenteditable` attribute makes any element editable:[^amazing-ce]

[^no-resize]: The `input` element doesn't change size as you type, and
    the text in the `input` element doesn't get its own layout object,
    so typing into an `input` element doesn't really have to induce
    layout, just paint.

[^amazing-ce]: The `contenteditable` attribute can turn any element on

>     any page into a living document. It' how we implemented the "typo"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    any page into a living document. It's how we implemented the "typo"
```

next: skipped
...

We [used compositing](animations.md) to make animations smoother, but
that doesn't help with interactions that affect layout, like text
editing or DOM modifications. Luckily, we can avoid redundant layout
work by treating the layout tree as a kind of cache, and only
recomputing the parts that change. This *invalidation* technique is
traditionally complex and bug-prone, but we'll use a principled
approach and simple abstractions to make it managable.

Editing Content
===============

In [Chapter 13](animations.md), we used compositing to smoothly
animate CSS properties like `transform` or `opacity`. But we couldn't
animate _layout-inducing_ properties this way because they change not
only the _display list_ but also the _layout tree_. And while it's
best to avoid animating layout-inducing properties, many user

> interactions that need to be responsive but change the layout tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interactions need to be responsive but change the layout tree.
```

Fundamentally, the reason editing this page is slow in our browser is
that it's pretty big.[^other-reasons] After all, it's not handling the
keypress that's slow: appending a character to a `Text` node takes
almost no time. What takes time is rerendering the whole page
afterwards. On a big page, even tiny changes can take a long time.

[^other-reasons]: I'm sure there are all sorts of performance
    improvements possible without implementing the invalidation
    techniques from this chapter, but invalidation is still essential
    for incremental performance, which is a kind of asymptotic
    guarantee that simple optimizations won't achieve.

We want interactions to be fast, even on large, complex pages, so we
want re-rendering the page to take time proportional to the *size of
the change*, and not proportional to the *size of the page*. I call

> this the principle of incremental performance, and it's crucial for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this the *principle of incremental performance*, and it's crucial for
```

handling large and complex web applications. Not only does it mean

> fast text editing, it also means that developers can also think about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fast text editing, it also means that developers can think about
```

> performance one change at a time, without consider the contents of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance one change at a time, without considering the contents of the
```

> whole page. The incremental performance is therefore necessary for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whole page. Incremental performance is therefore necessary for
```

complex applications. But the principle of incremental performance
also really constrains our browser. For example, during rendering even
*traversing* the whole layout tree would take time proportional to the

> whole page, not the change being made, so we can't do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whole page, not the change being made, so we can't even afford to do that.
```

To achieve incremental performance, we're going to need to think of
the initial render and later re-renders differently.[^big-change] When
the page is first loaded, rendering will take time proportional to the
size of the page. But we'll treat that initial render as a cache.
Later renders will only invalidate and recompute parts of that cache,
taking time proportional to the size of the change.

[^big-change]: While initial and later renders are conceptually
    different, they'll use the same code path. Basically, the initial
    render will be one big change from no page to the initial page,

>     while later re-renders will handle smaller changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    while later re-renders will handle smaller changes. But since a
    "small" change could just be setting the `innerHTML` of the whole
    DOM, all renders can also be viewed as equivalent. The key insight
    is to think about *common interaction patterns* we expect users
    and developers to use, and optimize for them.
```

> The key to this cache invalidation approach will be tracking the

Reviewer: Cache invalidation needs to be defined and introduced before this sentence.

Author: Rephrased

        # ...
```

But we don't want to `append` the same child more than once!

The issue here is called *idempotence*: repeated calls to `layout`

> need to not repeatedly change state. More formally, a function is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shouldn't repeatedly change state. More formally, a function is
```

  the `TextLayout` and `InputLayout` methods.
- Basically every layout method calls `device_px`.

The `new_line` and `add_inline_child` methods are only called through
`layout`, which resets the `children` array, so they don't break
idempotency. The `get_font` function acts as a cache, so multiple
calls return the same font object. And `display_px` just does math, so

> always returns the same result given the same inputs. In other words

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it always returns the same result given the same inputs. In other words
```

all of our `layout` methods are now idempotent.

Because all of the `layout` methods are now idempotent, it's safe to
call `layout` multiple times on the same object---which is exactly
what we're now doing. More generally, since it doesn't matter _how

> many_ times an idempotent function is called, we can skip redundant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many_ times an idempotent function is called, we can *skip redundant
```

> calls. That makes idempotency the foundation for the rest of this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calls*! That makes idempotency the foundation for the rest of this
```

```

It's important that _all_ dependencies of the protected field set the

> dirty bit. This can be challenging, since it requires being vigilent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dirty bit. This can be challenging, since it requires being vigilant
```

about which fields depend on which others. But if we do forget to set

> the direty bit, we'll sometimes fail to recompute the protected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the dirty bit, we'll sometimes fail to recompute the protected
```

        # ...
```

It's tempting to skip these assertions, since they should never be
triggered, but coding defensively like this catches bugs earlier and
makes them easier to debug. It's very easy to invalidate fields in the
wrong order, or skip a computation when it's actually important, and
you'd rather that trigger a crash rather than a subtly incorrect

> rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rendering (at least when debugging a toy browser--real browsers prefer not to crash).
```

Author: Love it
